                      Gear and Tire Applet User Guide

The document is a user guide for the Gear and Tire Applet. The first
section describes general use of the applet and the other sections contain
more specific information about tires, transmissions, transfer cases, and
ring and pinion, The general section covers what the Gear and Tire Applet
is and what it can be used for. It also covers general information on
ratios and the input and output of the Gear and Tire Applet.

What is the Gear and Tire Applet?

The gear and tire form is designed to assist you making gear and tire
selections for your four wheel drive vehicle. Larger tires gain ground
clearance, increase maximum fording depth, and increase the angles of
departure and approach, but they often don't work well with OEM gearing.
Auto manufactures build trucks for the street, which means they select high
gearing for fast acceleration and better gas milage. When larger tires are
put on these trucks, the driver may find themselves burning through
clutches because first gear is so high. Engine performance and gas milage
may suffer because the engine is forced to work outside of it's optimal RPM
ranges. Top speed on the highway will increase, but so will low speed on
the trail.

There are two main motivations to regear, the first is to return the truck
to the manufactures operating ranges to improve engine performance and
decrease wear and tear on the clutch and transmission. The second is to
increase offroad performance with lower gearing. Lower gearing allows the
offroader to go slower through obstacles giving the driver better control
so there is less chance of vehicle damage and occupant injury. There is a
penalty for low gears on top highway cruising speed. The gear and tire form
is designed to allow the user to try different configurations and see what
performance will be like for different configurations before going through
an expensive gear swap.

General Information on Gear Ratios

One important aspect of gear ratios is numerically large gears are the low
ones. Gear ratios are normally stated in the form x.xx:1, e.g. 6.32:1. This
translates mathematically to 1/6.32, and since 1/2 is more than 1/6, 6:1 is
lower than 2:1. The ratio means that for every 6.32 revolutions from the
input the output will rotate once. This happens to be granny low first gear
on a Ford T-18 transmission. When you are in first with the T-18, the
engine does 6.32 revolutions for every 1 revolution the transmissions
outputs. Fourth gear on the T-18 is 1.00:1, so for every revolution of the
engine, it outputs one revolution.

Input for the Gear and Tire Applet

The Gear and Tire Applet takes as input your tire size, transmission
ratios, transfer case low range, and ring and pinion.

The tire field will accept input in English or metric sizes. The entire
metric size must be input to calculate diameter, but the prefix 'P' or 'LT'
are optional. For example the tire size P225/75R15 could be entered without
the 'P'. For English sizes, the gear and tire form is only interested in
the diameter in inches. The rest is not needed, but if it is typed it will
be ignored. For example '32x11.50R15LT M+S' can be just entered 32.

Input of Transmission ratios, transfer case low range, and ring and pinion
all have the same basic form. The Gear and Tire Applet is looking for the
ratios and ratios are commonly expressed in the form x.xx:1. To save some
typing the ':1' part does not need to be entered. You can enter it if you
like but, it will be ignored. If you have tooth counts, for ring and pinion
for example, just divide the big number by the small. For example 41/10
ring and pinion translate to 4.10:1.

The user has the option to produce output in kilometers per hour or miles
per hour. No output is produced until the 'calculate' button is pressed.
This document is available by pressing the 'help' button.

Output for the Gear and Tire Applet

When the calculate button is pressed output is created in both graphical
and tabular form. The graph is a line graph with RPM on the x-axis ranging
from 0 to 4000 RPM. The y-axis is either MPH or KPH depending on user
input. MPH range from 0 to 80 MPH. KPH range from 0 to 120 KPH. Each
transmission gear is printed out as a seperate line in the graph first
being red, second blue, third green, fourth black, and fifth yellow. A
check box at the botton of the graph allows the user to "shift" the
transfer case into low range. The title of the graph gives the users tire
size and ring and pinion ratio.

The tabular output is also produced each time the calculate button is
pressed. The title on the tabular output indicates the units of output
either KPH or MPH. It also indicates the users selection of tire and ring
and pinion and allows the user to enter different RPMs to see the table at
various engine outputs. Each row of the table represents a gear of the
transmission first, second, third and so forth. The columns represent high
and low range of the transfer case.

The crawl ratio, which is often used to compare gearing set ups, is also
included in the tabular output. The crawl ratio represents compound low, or
first gear of the transmission and low range of the transfer case. For
example, many Wranglers have a first gear around 3.83:1, the transfer case
low range is 2.72:1, and the axle ring and pinion is 3.07:1. This means the
crawl ratio is 3.83*2.72*3.07 or around 32:1. Put some big tires on that
Wrangler and it will be difficult to control on a technical trail. A crawl
ratio around 60:1 is often good target.

There is more detailed help on tires, transmissions, transfer cases, and
ring and pinion, see the special sections for these topics.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Author: Terry L Howe (txh3202@hertz.njit.edu)
July 18, 1996
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
