              Gear and Tire Applet User Guide: Ring and Pinion

The ring and pinion are located in the differential housing of the axle.
The pinion takes input from the driveshaft and turns the ring. The ring
spins the differential which turns the axle shafts. There are a fairly wide
variety of ring and pinions ratios available anywhere from 2.73:1 to 6.50:1
depending on the model of the axle. Since transmission and transfercase
ratios are fairly set, a change of ring and pinion is the easiest and least
expensive way to modify the gearing of your 4x4.

Figuring out what ratio ring and pinion you have is not always easy.
Depending on engine, transmission, and option package the manufacturer may
have used any one of several ratios. The easiest way is to locate and try
to read the tag on on the differential housing. Sometimes this tag is
located on the differential housing cover, sometimes it is not. It may be a
a code stamped in the housing that needs to be looked up in your technical
service manual.

One sure fire way of determining your ratio is openning up the axle and
taking a look. Often the ring is stamped with tooth count, ratio, and build
date. Sometimes it isn't stamped, but you can still count the teeth
yourself and divide ring teeth by pinion teeth to get the ratio.

An easier, but not as accurate method of determining your ratio is to jack
one wheel off the ground and count the number of drive shaft rotations it
takes to turn the tire one full rotation. Multiply this number by two and
that is your ratio. If you have a looking or limited slip differential, you
may find it difficult to rotate the tire by hand. If this is the case lift
both tires off the ground and support the vehicle with jack stands to count
rotations for one rotation of both tires.

One final note on ring and pinion, if you know the ratio of one axle the
other should be the same give or take a few hundredths. So if you find a
tag on the front, but nothing on the rear, go with the tag you found.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Author: Terry L Howe (txh3202@hertz.njit.edu)
July 18, 1996
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
